# Roadmap for future work:

[[!toc levels=3 startlevel=2  ]]

### More ways of setting IO path options

We need an option for setting IO path options on a per file descriptor or per
process basis.

### tmpdir support

Add a directory option for using it as a tmpdir - the contents will be deleted
on every mount.

Since the contents won't be needed after an unclean shutdown, there's no need
for fsync() to do anything - this option will also turn fsync() into a noop,
and without the fsync buffered IO will only be flushed on memory reclaim -
meaning, tmpdir directories should perform just as well as a tmpfs.

### Compression

We'd like to add multithreaded compression, for when a single thread is doing
writes at a high enough rate to be CPU bound.

We'd also like to add support for xz compression: this will be useful when
doing a "squashfs-like" mode. The blocker is that kernel only has support for
xz decompression, not compression - hopefully we can get this added.

### Device management:

We need a concept of "failure domains", and perhaps something more, for managing
large numbers of devices with bcachefs to make sense. Currently, disks can be
assigned labels that are essentially paths, delimited by periods, e.g.

  controller1.ssd.ssd1
  controller1.ssd.ssd2
  controller1.hdd.hdd1
  controller2.hdd.hdd1
  controller2.hdd.hdd2

This lets disks be organized into a heirarchy, and referring to any part of the
heirarchy will include all the disks underneath that point: e.g. controller1
would refer to the first three disks in the example.

This is insufficient, though. If a user has a filesystem with 60 drives, all
alike, we need a way to specify that some disks are on the same controller and
that multiple replicas should not be stored on the same controller, and we also
need a way to constrain how replicated writes are laid out. Today, in a 60
devices filesystem with 3x replication, each allocation will be unconstrained
which means that the failure of _any_ three devices would lead to loss of data.

A feature that addresses these issues still needs to be designed.

### Send and receive

Like ZFS and btrfs have, we need it to. This will give us the ability to
efficiently synchronize filesystems over a network for backup/redundancy
purposes - much more efficient than rsync, and it'll pair well with snapshots.

Since all metadata exists as btree keys, this won't be a huge amount of work
to implement: we need a network protocol, and then we need to scan and send
for keys newer than version number X (if making use of key version numbers),
or keys newer than a given snapshot ID.

### Support for sub-block size writes

Devices with larger than 4k blocksize are coming, and this is going to result
in more wasted disk space due to internal fragmentation.

Support for writes at smaller than blocksize granularity would be a useful
addition. The read size is easy: they'll require bouncing, which we already
support. Writes are trickier - there's a few options:

 * Buffer up writes when we don't have full blocks to write? Highly
   problematic, not going to do this.
 * Read modify write? Not an option for raw flash, would prefer it to not be
   our only option
 * Do data journalling when we don't have a full block to write? Possible
   solution, we want data journalling anyways

### Journal on NVRAM devices

NVRAM devices are currently a specialized thing, which are always promising to
become more widely available. We could make use of them for the journal;
they'd let us cheaply add full data journalling (useful for previous feature)
and greatly reduce fsync overhead.

### Online fsck

For supporting huge filesystems, and competing with XFS, bcachefs needs online
fsck.

This will be easier in bcachefs than it was in XFS, since our fsck
implementation is part of the main filesystem codebase and uses the normal
btree transaction API that's available at runtime.

The current fsck implementation is becoming the online fsck implementation:
some recovery passes can already run online or in the background, while the
remaining work is auditing fsck code for locking issues and adding the
additional locking needed around normal filesystem activity.

## ZNS, SMR device support:

[[ZNS|https://zonedstorage.io/docs/introduction/zns]] is a technology for
cutting out the normal normal flash translation layer (FTL), and instead
exposing an interface closer to the raw flash.

SSDs have large erase units, much larger than the write blocksize, so the FTL
has to implement a mapping layer as well as garbage collection to expose a
normal, random write block device interface. Since a copy-on-write filesystem
needs both of these anyways, adding ZNS support to bcachefs will eliminate a
significant amount of overhead and improve performance, especially tail latency.

[[SMR|https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shingled_magnetic_recording]] is another
technology for rotational hard drives, completely different from ZNS in
implementation but quite similar in how it is exposed and used. SMR enables
higher density, and supporting it directly in the filesystem eliminates much of
the performance penalties.

bcachefs allocation is bucket based: we allocate an entire bucket, write to it
once, and then never rewrite it until the entire bucket is empty and ready to
be reused. This maps nicely to both ZNS and SMR zones, which makes supporting
both of these directly particularly attractive.

## Container filesystem mode

Container filesystems are another special purpose type of filesystem we could
potentially fold into bcachefs - e.g.
[[puzzlefs|https://github.com/project-machine/puzzlefs]]

These have a number of features, e.g. verity support for cryptographically
verifying a filesystem image (which we can do via our existing cryptographic
MAC support) - but the interesting feature here is support for referring to
data (extents, entire files) in a separate location - in this case, the host
filesystem.

### Cloud storage management

The previous feature is potentially more widely useful: allowing inodes and
extents to refer to arbitrary callbacks for fetching/storing data would be the
basis for managing data in e.g. cloud storage, and in combination with local
storage in a seamless tierid system.
